---
zkid: 2021-07-18_1259_19
---

## Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Canto 3:<br> "The Status Quo"
# Chapter Seventeen:<br> Victory of Hiraṇyākṣa<br> Over All the Directions<br> of the Universe


TEXT 1

maitreya uvāca

niśamyātma-bhuvā gītaṁ

kāraṇaṁ śaṅkayojjhitāḥ

tataḥ sarve nyavartanta

tridivāya divaukasaḥ

SYNONYMS

maitreyaḥ—the sage Maitreya; uvāca—said; niśamya—upon hearing; ātma-bhuvā—by Brahmā; gītam—explanation; kāraṇam—the cause; śaṅkayā—from fear; ujjhitāḥ—freed; tataḥ—then; sarve—all; nyavartanta—returned; tri-divāya—to the heavenly planets; diva-okasaḥ—the demigods (who inhabit the higher planets).

TRANSLATION

Śrī Maitreya said: The demigods, the inhabitants of the higher planets, were freed from all fear upon hearing the cause of the darkness explained by Brahmā, who was born from Viṣṇu. Thus they all returned to their respective planets.

PURPORT

The demigods, who are denizens of higher planets, are also very much afraid of incidents such as the universe’s becoming dark, and so they consulted Brahmā. This indicates that the quality of fear exists for every living entity in the material world. The four principal activities of material existence are eating, sleeping, fearing and mating. The fear element exists also in the demigods. On every planet, even in the higher planetary systems, including the moon and the sun, as well as on this earth, the same principles of animal life exist. Otherwise, why are the demigods also afraid of the darkness? The difference between the demigods and ordinary human beings is that the demigods approach authority, whereas the inhabitants of this earth defy authority. If people would only approach the authority, then every adverse condition in this universe could be rectified. Arjuna was also disturbed on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, but he approached the authority, Kṛṣṇa, and his problem was solved. The conclusive instruction of this incident is that we may be disturbed by some material condition, but if we approach the authority who can actually explain the matter, then our problem is solved. The demigods approached Brahmā for the meaning of the disturbance, and after hearing from him they were satisfied and returned home peacefully.

TEXT 2

ditis tu bhartur ādeśād

apatya-pariśaṅkinī

pūrṇe varṣa-śate sādhvī

putrau prasuṣuve yamau

SYNONYMS

ditiḥ—Diti; tu—but; bhartuḥ—of her husband; ādeśāt—by the order; apatya—from her children; pariśaṅkinī—being apprehensive of trouble; pūrṇe—full; varṣa-śate—after one hundred years; sādhvī—the virtuous lady; putrau—two sons; prasuṣuve—begot; yamau—twins.

TRANSLATION

The virtuous lady Diti had been very apprehensive of trouble to the gods from the children in her womb, and her husband predicted the same. She brought forth twin sons after a full one hundred years of pregnancy.

TEXT 3

utpātā bahavas tatra

nipetur jāyamānayoḥ

divi bhuvy antarikṣe ca

lokasyoru-bhayāvahāḥ

SYNONYMS

utpātāḥ—natural disturbances; bahavaḥ—many; tatra—there; nipetuḥ—occurred; jāyamānayoḥ—on their birth; divi—in the heavenly planets; bhuvi—on the earth; antarikṣe—in outer space; ca—and; lokasya—to the world; uru—greatly; bhaya-āvahāḥ—causing fear.

TRANSLATION

On the birth of the two demons there were many natural disturbances, all very fearful and wonderful, in the heavenly planets, the earthly planets and in between them.

TEXT 4

sahācalā bhuvaś celur

diśaḥ sarvāḥ prajajvaluḥ

solkāś cāśanayaḥ petuḥ

ketavaś cārti-hetavaḥ

SYNONYMS

saha—along with; acalāḥ—the mountains; bhuvaḥ—of the earth; celuḥ—shook; diśaḥ—directions; sarvāḥ—all; prajajvaluḥ—blazed like fire; sa—with; ulkāḥ—meteors; ca—and; aśanayaḥ—thunderbolts; petuḥ—fell; ketavaḥ—comets; ca—and; ārti-hetavaḥ—the cause of all inauspiciousness.

TRANSLATION

There were earthquakes along the mountains on the earth, and it appeared that there was fire everywhere. Many inauspicious planets like Saturn appeared, along with comets, meteors and thunderbolts.

PURPORT

When natural disturbances occur on a planet, one should understand that a demon must have taken birth there. In the present age the number of demoniac people is increasing; therefore natural disturbances are also increasing. There is no doubt about this, as we can understand from the statements of the Bhāgavatam.

TEXT 5

vavau vāyuḥ suduḥsparśaḥ

phūt-kārān īrayan muhuḥ

unmūlayan naga-patīn

vātyānīko rajo-dhvajaḥ

SYNONYMS

vavau—blew; vāyuḥ—the winds; su-duḥsparśaḥ—unpleasant to touch; phūt-kārān—hissing sounds; īrayan—giving out; muhuḥ—again and again; unmūlayan—uprooting; naga-patīn—gigantic trees; vātyā—cyclonic air; anīkaḥ—armies; rajaḥ—dust; dhvajaḥ—ensigns.

TRANSLATION

There blew winds which were most uninviting to the touch, hissing again and again and uprooting gigantic trees. They had storms for their armies and clouds of dust for their ensigns.

PURPORT

When there are natural disturbances like blowing cyclones, too much heat or snowfall, and uprooting of trees by hurricanes, it is to be understood that the demoniac population is increasing and so the natural disturbance is also taking place. There are many countries on the globe, even at the present moment, where all these disturbances are current. This is true all over the world. There is insufficient sunshine, and there are always clouds in the sky, snowfall and severe cold. These assure that such places are inhabited by demoniac people who are accustomed to all kinds of forbidden, sinful activity.

TEXT 6

uddhasat-taḍid-ambhoda-

ghaṭayā naṣṭa-bhāgaṇe

vyomni praviṣṭa-tamasā

na sma vyādṛśyate padam

SYNONYMS

uddhasat—laughing loudly; taḍit—lightning; ambhoda—of clouds; ghaṭayā—by masses; naṣṭa—lost; bhā-gaṇe—the luminaries; vyomni—in the sky; praviṣṭa—enveloped; tamasā—by darkness; na—not; sma vyādṛśyate—could be seen; padam—any place.

TRANSLATION

The luminaries in the heavens were screened by masses of clouds, in which lightning sometimes flashed as though laughing. Darkness reigned everywhere, and nothing could be seen.

TEXT 7

cukrośa vimanā vārdhir

udūrmiḥ kṣubhitodaraḥ

sodapānāś ca saritaś

cukṣubhuḥ śuṣka-paṅkajāḥ

SYNONYMS

cukrośa—wailed aloud; vimanāḥ—stricken with sorrow; vārdhiḥ—the ocean; udūrmiḥ—high waves; kṣubhita—agitated; udaraḥ—the creatures inside; sa-udapānāḥ—with the drinking water of the lakes and the wells; ca—and; saritaḥ—the rivers; cukṣubhuḥ—were agitated; śuṣka—withered; paṅkajāḥ—lotus flowers.

TRANSLATION

The ocean with its high waves wailed aloud as if stricken with sorrow, and there was a commotion among the creatures inhabiting the ocean. The rivers and lakes were also agitated, and lotuses withered.

TEXT 8

muhuḥ paridhayo ’bhūvan

sarāhvoḥ śaśi-sūryayoḥ

nirghātā ratha-nirhrādā

vivarebhyaḥ prajajñire

SYNONYMS

muhuḥ—again and again; paridhayaḥ—misty halos; abhūvan—appeared; sa-rāhvoḥ—during eclipses; śaśi—of the moon; sūryayoḥ—of the sun; nirghātāḥ—claps of thunder; ratha-nirhrādāḥ—sounds like those of rattling chariots; vivarebhyaḥ—from the mountain caves; prajajñire—were produced.

TRANSLATION

Misty halos appeared around the sun and the moon during solar and lunar eclipses again and again. Claps of thunder were heard even without clouds, and sounds like those of rattling chariots emerged from the mountain caves.

TEXT 9

antar-grāmeṣu mukhato

vamantyo vahnim ulbaṇam

sṛgālolūka-ṭaṅkāraiḥ

praṇedur aśivaṁ śivāḥ

SYNONYMS

antaḥ—in the interior; grāmeṣu—in the villages; mukhataḥ—from their mouths; vamantyaḥ—vomiting; vahnim—fire; ulbaṇam—fearful; sṛgāla—jackals; ulūka—owls; ṭaṅkāraiḥ—with their cries; praṇeduḥ—created their respective vibrations; aśivam—portentously; śivāḥ—the she-jackals.

TRANSLATION

In the interior of the villages she-jackals yelled portentously, vomiting strong fire from their mouths, and jackals and owls also joined them with their cries.

TEXT 10

saṅgītavad rodanavad

unnamayya śirodharām

vyamuñcan vividhā vāco

grāma-siṁhās tatas tataḥ

SYNONYMS

saṅgīta-vat—like singing; rodana-vat—like wailing; unnamayya—raising; śirodharām—the neck; vyamuñcan—uttered; vividhāḥ—various; vācaḥ—cries; grāma-siṁhāḥ—the dogs; tataḥ tataḥ—here and there.

TRANSLATION

Raising their necks, dogs cried here and there, now in the manner of singing and now of wailing.

TEXT 11

kharāś ca karkaśaiḥ kṣattaḥ

khurair ghnanto dharā-talam

khārkāra-rabhasā mattāḥ

paryadhāvan varūthaśaḥ

SYNONYMS

kharāḥ—asses; ca—and; karkaśaiḥ—hard; kṣattaḥ—O Vidura; khuraiḥ—with their hooves; ghnantaḥ—striking; dharā-talam—the surface of the earth; khāḥ-kāra—braying; rabhasāḥ—wildly engaged in; mattāḥ—mad; paryadhāvan—ran hither and thither; varūthaśaḥ—in herds.

TRANSLATION

O Vidura, the asses ran hither and thither in herds, striking the earth with their hard hooves and wildly braying.

PURPORT

Asses also feel very respectable as a race, and when they run in flocks hither and thither in so-called jollity, it is understood to be a bad sign for human society.

TEXT 12

rudanto rāsabha-trastā

nīḍād udapatan khagāḥ

ghoṣe ’raṇye ca paśavaḥ

śakṛn-mūtram akurvata

SYNONYMS

rudantaḥ—shrieking; rāsabha—by the asses; trastāḥ—frightened; nīḍāt—from the nest; udapatan—flew up; khagāḥ—birds; ghoṣe—in the cowshed; araṇye—in the woods; ca—and; paśavaḥ—the cattle; śakṛt—dung; mūtram—urine; akurvata—passed.

TRANSLATION

Frightened by the braying of the asses, birds flew shrieking from their nests, while cattle in the cowsheds as well as in the woods passed dung and urine.

TEXT 13

gāvo ’trasann asṛg-dohās

toyadāḥ pūya-varṣiṇaḥ

vyarudan deva-liṅgāni

drumāḥ petur vinānilam

SYNONYMS

gāvaḥ—the cows; atrasan—were frightened; asṛk—blood; dohāḥ—yielding; toyadāḥ—clouds; pūya—pus; varṣiṇaḥ—raining; vyarudan—shed tears; deva-liṅgāni—the images of the gods; drumāḥ—trees; petuḥ—fell down; vinā—without; anilam—a blast of wind.

TRANSLATION

Cows, terrified, yielded blood in place of milk, clouds rained pus, the images of the gods in the temples shed tears, and trees fell down without a blast of wind.

TEXT 14

grahān puṇyatamān anye

bhagaṇāṁś cāpi dīpitāḥ

aticerur vakra-gatyā

yuyudhuś ca parasparam

SYNONYMS

grahān—planets; puṇya-tamān—most auspicious; anye—others (the ominous planets); bha-gaṇān—luminaries; ca—and; api—also; dīpitāḥ—illuminating; aticeruḥ—overlapped; vakra-gatyā—taking retrograde courses; yuyudhuḥ—came into conflict; ca—and; paraḥ-param—with one another.

TRANSLATION

Ominous planets such as Mars and Saturn shone brighter and surpassed the auspicious ones such as Mercury, Jupiter and Venus as well as a number of lunar mansions. Taking seemingly retrograde courses, the planets came in conflict with one another.

PURPORT

The entire universe is moving under the three modes of material nature. Those living entities who are in goodness are called the pious species—pious lands, pious trees, etc. It is similar with the planets also; many planets are considered pious, and others are considered impious. Saturn and Mars are considered impious. When the pious planets shine very brightly, it is an auspicious sign, but when the inauspicious planets shine very brightly, this is not a very good sign.

TEXT 15

dṛṣṭvānyāṁś ca mahotpātān

atat-tattva-vidaḥ prajāḥ

brahma-putrān ṛte bhītā

menire viśva-samplavam

SYNONYMS

dṛṣṭvā—having seen; anyān—others; ca—and; mahā—great; utpātān—evil omens; a-tat-tattva-vidaḥ—not knowing the secret (of the portents); prajāḥ—people; brahma-putrān—the sons of Brahmā (the four Kumāras); ṛte—except; bhītāḥ—being fearful; menire—thought; viśva-samplavam—the dissolution of the universe.

TRANSLATION

Marking these and many other omens of evil times, everyone but the four sage-sons of Brahmā, who were aware of the fall of Jaya and Vijaya and of their birth as Diti’s sons, was seized with fear. They did not know the secrets of these portents and thought that the dissolution of the universe was at hand.

PURPORT

According to Bhagavad-gītā, Seventh Chapter, the laws of nature are so stringent that it is impossible for the living entity to surpass their enforcement. It is also explained that only those who are fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa in Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be saved. We can learn from the description of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that it is because of the birth of two great demons that there were so many natural disturbances. It is to be indirectly understood, as previously described, that when there are constant disturbances on the earth, that is an omen that some demoniac people have been born or that the demoniac population has increased. In former days there were only two demons—those born of Diti—yet there were so many disturbances. At the present day, especially in this age of Kali, these disturbances are always visible, which indicates that the demoniac population has certainly increased.

To check the increase of demoniac population, the Vedic civilization enacted so many rules and regulations of social life, the most important of which is the garbhādhāna process for begetting good children. In Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna informed Kṛṣṇa that if there is unwanted population (varṇa-saṅkara), the entire world will appear to be hell. People are very anxious for peace in the world, but there are so many unwanted children born without the benefit of the garbhādhāna ceremony, just like the demons born from Diti. Diti was so lusty that she forced her husband to copulate at a time which was inauspicious, and therefore the demons were born to create disturbances. In having sex life to beget children, one should observe the process for begetting nice children; if each and every householder in every family observes the Vedic system, then there are nice children, not demons, and automatically there is peace in the world. If we do not follow regulations in life for social tranquillity, we cannot expect peace. Rather, we will have to undergo the stringent reactions of natural laws.

TEXT 16

tāv ādi-daityau sahasā

vyajyamānātma-pauruṣau

vavṛdhāte ’śma-sāreṇa

kāyenādri-patī iva

SYNONYMS

tau—those two; ādi-daityau—demons in the beginning of creation; sahasā—quickly; vyajyamāna—being manifest; ātma—own; pauruṣau—prowess; vavṛdhāte—grew; aśma-sāreṇa—steellike; kāyena—with bodily frames; adri-patī—two great mountains; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

These two demons who appeared in ancient times soon began to exhibit uncommon bodily features; they had steellike frames which began to grow just like two great mountains.

PURPORT

There are two classes of men in the world; one is called the demon, and the other is called the demigod. The demigods concern themselves with the spiritual upliftment of human society, whereas the demons are concerned with physical and material upliftment. The two demons born of Diti began to make their bodies as strong as iron frames, and they were so tall that they seemed to touch outer space. They were decorated with valuable ornaments, and they thought that this was success in life. Originally it was planned that Jaya and Vijaya, the two doorkeepers of Vaikuṇṭha, were to take birth in this material world, where, by the curse of the sages, they were to play the part of always being angry with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As demoniac persons, they became so angry that they were not concerned with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but simply with physical comforts and physical upliftment.

TEXT 17

divi-spṛśau hema-kirīṭa-koṭibhir

niruddha-kāṣṭhau sphurad-aṅgadā-bhujau

gāṁ kampayantau caraṇaiḥ pade pade

kaṭyā sukāñcyārkam atītya tasthatuḥ

SYNONYMS

divi-spṛśau—touching the sky; hema—golden; kirīṭa—of their helmets; koṭibhiḥ—with the crests; niruddha—blocked; kāṣṭhau—the directions; sphurat—brilliant; aṅgadā—bracelets; bhujau—on whose arms; gām—the earth; kampayantau—shaking; caraṇaiḥ—with their feet; pade pade—at every step; kaṭyā—with their waists; su-kāñcyā—with beautiful decorated belts; arkam—the sun; atītya—surpassing; tasthatuḥ—they stood.

TRANSLATION

Their bodies became so tall that they seemed to kiss the sky with the crests of their gold crowns. They blocked the view of all directions and while walking shook the earth at every step. Their arms were adorned with brilliant bracelets, and they stood as if covering the sun with their waists, which were bound with excellent and beautiful girdles.

PURPORT

In the demoniac way of civilization, people are interested in getting a body constructed in such a way that when they walk on the street the earth will tremble and when they stand it will appear that they cover the sun and the vision of the four directions. If a race appears strong in body, their country is materially considered to be among the highly advanced nations of the world.

TEXT 18

prajāpatir nāma tayor akārṣīd

yaḥ prāk sva-dehād yamayor ajāyata

taṁ vai hiraṇyakaśipuṁ viduḥ prajā

yaṁ taṁ hiraṇyākṣam asūta sāgrataḥ

SYNONYMS

prajāpatiḥ—Kaśyapa; nāma—names; tayoḥ—of the two; akārṣīt—gave; yaḥ—who; prāk—first; sva-dehāt—from his body; yamayoḥ—of the twins; ajāyata—was delivered; tam—him; vai—indeed; hiraṇyakaśipum—Hiraṇyakaśipu; viduḥ—know; prajāḥ—people; yam—whom; tam—him; hiraṇyākṣam—Hiraṇyākṣa; asūta—gave birth to; sā—she (Diti); agrataḥ—first.

TRANSLATION

Kaśyapa, Prajāpati, the creator of the living entities, gave his twin sons their names; the one who was born first he named Hiraṇyākṣa, and the one who was first conceived by Diti he named Hiraṇyakaśipu.

PURPORT

There is an authoritative Vedic literature called Piṇḍa-siddhi in which the scientific understanding of pregnancy is very nicely described. It is stated that when the male secretion enters the menstrual flux in the uterus in two successive drops, the mother develops two embryos in her womb, and she brings forth twins in a reverse order to that in which they were first conceived; the child conceived first is born later, and the one conceived later is brought forth first. The first child conceived in the womb lives behind the second child, so when birth takes place the second child appears first, and the first child appears second. In this case it is understood that Hiraṇyākṣa, the second child conceived, was delivered first, whereas Hiraṇyakaśipu, the child who was behind him, having been conceived first, was born second.

TEXT 19

cakre hiraṇyakaśipur

dorbhyāṁ brahma-vareṇa ca

vaśe sa-pālāḹ lokāṁs trīn

akuto-mṛtyur uddhataḥ

SYNONYMS

cakre—made; hiraṇyakaśipuḥ—Hiraṇyakaśipu; dorbhyām—by his two arms; brahma-vareṇa—by the benediction of Brahmā; ca—and; vaśe—under his control; sa-pālān—along with their protectors; lokān—the worlds; trīn—three; akutaḥ-mṛtyuḥ—fearing death from no one; uddhataḥ—puffed up.

TRANSLATION

The elder child, Hiraṇyakaśipu, was unafraid of death from anyone within the three worlds because he received a benediction from Lord Brahmā. He was proud and puffed up due to this benediction and was able to bring all three planetary systems under his control.

PURPORT

As will be revealed in later chapters, Hiraṇyakaśipu underwent severe austerity and penance to satisfy Brahmā and thus receive a benediction of immortality. Actually, it is impossible even for Lord Brahmā to give anyone the benediction of becoming immortal, but indirectly Hiraṇyakaśipu received the benediction that no one within this material world would be able to kill him. In other words, because he originally came from the abode of Vaikuṇṭha, he was not to be killed by anyone within this material world. The Lord desired to appear Himself to kill him. One may be very proud of his material advancement in knowledge, but he cannot be immune to the four principles of material existence, namely birth, death, old age and disease. It was the Lord’s plan to teach people that even Hiraṇyakaśipu, who was so powerful and strongly built, could not live more than his destined duration of life. One may become as strong and puffed up as Hiraṇyakaśipu and bring under his control all the three worlds, but there is no possibility of continuing life eternally or keeping the conquered booty forever. So many emperors have ascended to power, and they are now lost in oblivion; that is the history of the world.

TEXT 20

hiraṇyākṣo ’nujas tasya

priyaḥ prīti-kṛd anvaham

gadā-pāṇir divaṁ yāto

yuyutsur mṛgayan raṇam

SYNONYMS

hiraṇyākṣaḥ—Hiraṇyākṣa; anujaḥ—younger brother; tasya—his; priyaḥ—beloved; prīti-kṛt—ready to please; anu-aham—every day; gadā-pāṇiḥ—with a club in hand; divam—to the higher planets; yātaḥ—traveled; yuyutsuḥ—desirous to fight; mṛgayan—seeking; raṇam—combat.

TRANSLATION

His younger brother, Hiraṇyākṣa, was always ready to satisfy his elder brother by his activities. Hiraṇyākṣa took a club on his shoulder and traveled all over the universe with a fighting spirit just to satisfy Hiraṇyakaśipu.

PURPORT

The demoniac spirit is to train all family members to exploit the resources of this universe for personal sense gratification, whereas the godly spirit is to engage everything in the service of the Lord. Hiraṇyakaśipu was himself very powerful, and he made his younger brother, Hiraṇyākṣa, powerful to assist him in fighting with everyone and lording it over material nature as long as possible. If possible, he wanted to rule the universe eternally. These are demonstrations of the spirit of the demoniac living entity.

TEXT 21

taṁ vīkṣya duḥsaha-javaṁ

raṇat-kāñcana-nūpuram

vaijayantyā srajā juṣṭam

aṁsa-nyasta-mahā-gadam

SYNONYMS

tam—him; vīkṣya—having seen; duḥsaha—difficult to control; javam—temper; raṇat—tinkling; kāñcana—gold; nūpuram—anklets; vaijayantyā srajā—with a vaijayantī garland; juṣṭam—adorned; aṁsa—on his shoulder; nyasta—rested; mahā-gadam—a huge mace.

TRANSLATION

Hiraṇyākṣa’s temper was difficult to control. He had anklets of gold tinkling about his feet, he was adorned with a gigantic garland, and he rested his huge mace on one of his shoulders.

TEXT 22

mano-vīrya-varotsiktam

asṛṇyam akuto-bhayam

bhītā nililyire devās

tārkṣya-trastā ivāhayaḥ

SYNONYMS

manaḥ-vīrya—by mental and bodily strength; vara—by the boon; utsiktam—proud; asṛṇyam—not able to be checked; akutaḥ-bhayam—fearing no one; bhītāḥ—frightened; nililyire—hid themselves; devāḥ—the demigods; tārkṣya—Garuḍa; trastāḥ—frightened of; iva—like; ahayaḥ—snakes.

TRANSLATION

His mental and bodily strength as well as the boon conferred upon him had made him proud. He feared death at the hands of no one, and there was no checking him. The gods, therefore, were seized with fear at his very sight, and they hid themselves even as snakes hide themselves for fear of Garuḍa.

PURPORT

The asuras are generally strongly built, as described here, and therefore their mental condition is very sound, and their prowess is also extraordinary. Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu, having received the boon that they would not be killed by any other living entity within this universe, were almost immortal, and thus they were completely fearless.

TEXT 23

sa vai tirohitān dṛṣṭvā

mahasā svena daitya-rāṭ

sendrān deva-gaṇān kṣībān

apaśyan vyanadad bhṛśam

SYNONYMS

saḥ—he; vai—indeed; tirohitān—vanished; dṛṣṭvā—having seen; mahasā—by might; svena—his own; daitya-rāṭ—the chief of the Daityas (demons); sa-indrān—along with Indra; deva-gaṇān—the demigods; kṣībān—intoxicated; apaśyan—not finding; vyanadat—roared; bhṛśam—loudly.

TRANSLATION

On not finding Indra and the other demigods, who had previously been intoxicated with power, the chief of the Daityas, seeing that they had all vanished before his might, roared loudly.

TEXT 24

tato nivṛttaḥ krīḍiṣyan

gambhīraṁ bhīma-nisvanam

vijagāhe mahā-sattvo

vārdhiṁ matta iva dvipaḥ

SYNONYMS

tataḥ—then; nivṛttaḥ—returned; krīḍiṣyan—for the sake of sport; gambhīram—deep; bhīma-nisvanam—making a terrible sound; vijagāhe—dived; mahā-sattvaḥ—the mighty being; vārdhim—in the ocean; mattaḥ—in wrath; iva—like; dvipaḥ—an elephant.

TRANSLATION

After returning from the heavenly kingdom, the mighty demon, who was like an elephant in wrath, for the sake of sport dived into the deep ocean, which was roaring terribly.

TEXT 25

tasmin praviṣṭe varuṇasya sainikā

yādo-gaṇāḥ sanna-dhiyaḥ sasādhvasāḥ

ahanyamānā api tasya varcasā

pradharṣitā dūrataraṁ pradudruvuḥ

SYNONYMS

tasmin praviṣṭe—when he entered the ocean; varuṇasya—of Varuṇa; sainikāḥ—the defenders; yādaḥ-gaṇāḥ—the aquatic animals; sanna-dhiyaḥ—depressed; sa-sādhvasāḥ—with fear; ahanyamānāḥ—not being hit; api—even; tasya—his; varcasā—by splendor; pradharṣitāḥ—stricken; dūra-taram—far away; pradudruvuḥ—they ran fast.

TRANSLATION

On his entering the ocean, the aquatic animals who formed the host of Varuṇa were stricken with fear and ran far away. Thus Hiraṇyākṣa showed his splendor without dealing a blow.

PURPORT

Materialistic demons sometimes appear to be very powerful and are seen to establish their supremacy throughout the world. Here also it appears that Hiraṇyākṣa, by his demoniac strength, actually established his supremacy throughout the universe, and the demigods were afraid of his uncommon power. Not only were the demigods in space afraid of the demons Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa, but so also were the aquatic animals within the sea.

TEXT 26

sa varṣa-pūgān udadhau mahā-balaś

caran mahormīñ chvasaneritān muhuḥ

maurvyābhijaghne gadayā vibhāvarīm

āsedivāṁs tāta purīṁ pracetasaḥ

SYNONYMS

saḥ—he; varṣa-pūgān—for many years; udadhau—in the ocean; mahā-balaḥ—mighty; caran—moving; mahā-ūrmīn—gigantic waves; śvasana—by the wind; īritān—tossed; muhuḥ—again and again; maurvyā—iron; abhijaghne—he struck; gadayā—with his mace; vibhāvarīm—Vibhāvarī; āsedivān—reached; tāta—O dear Vidura; purīm—the capital; pracetasaḥ—of Varuṇa.

TRANSLATION

Moving about in the ocean for many, many years, the mighty Hiraṇyākṣa smote the gigantic wind-tossed waves again and again with his iron mace and reached Vibhāvarī, the capital of Varuṇa.

PURPORT

Varuṇa is supposed to be the predominating deity of the waters, and his capital, which is known as Vibhāvarī, is within the watery kingdom.

TEXT 27

tatropalabhyāsura-loka-pālakaṁ

yādo-gaṇānām ṛṣabhaṁ pracetasam

smayan pralabdhuṁ praṇipatya nīcavaj

jagāda me dehy adhirāja saṁyugam

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; upalabhya—having reached; asura-loka—of the regions where the demons reside; pālakam—the guardian; yādaḥ-gaṇānām—of the aquatic creatures; ṛṣabham—the lord; pracetasam—Varuṇa; smayan—smiling; pralabdhum—to make fun; praṇipatya—having bowed down; nīca-vat—like a lowborn man; jagāda—he said; me—to me; dehi—give; adhirāja—O great lord; saṁyugam—battle.

TRANSLATION

Vibhāvarī is the home of Varuṇa, lord of the aquatic creatures and guardian of the lower regions of the universe, where the demons generally reside. There Hiraṇyākṣa fell at Varuṇa’s feet like a lowborn man, and to make fun of him he said with a smile, “Give me battle, O Supreme Lord!”

PURPORT

The demoniac person always challenges others and tries to occupy others’ property by force. Here these symptoms are fully displayed by Hiraṇyākṣa, who begged war from a person who had no desire to fight.

TEXT 28

tvaṁ loka-pālo ’dhipatir bṛhac-chravā

vīryāpaho durmada-vīra-māninām

vijitya loke ’khila-daitya-dānavān

yad rājasūyena purāyajat prabho

SYNONYMS

tvam—you (Varuṇa); loka-pālaḥ—guardian of the planet; adhipatiḥ—a ruler; bṛhat-śravāḥ—of wide fame; vīrya—the power; apahaḥ—diminished; durmada—of the proud; vīra-māninām—thinking themselves very big heroes; vijitya—having conquered; loke—in the world; akhila—all; daitya—the demons; dānavān—the Dānavas; yat—whence; rāja-sūyena—with a Rājasūya sacrifice; purā—formerly; ayajat—worshiped; prabho—O lord.

TRANSLATION

You are the guardian of an entire sphere and a ruler of wide fame. Having crushed the might of arrogant and conceited warriors and having conquered all the Daityas and Dānavas in the world, you once performed a Rājasūya sacrifice to the Lord.

TEXT 29

sa evam utsikta-madena vidviṣā

dṛḍhaṁ pralabdho bhagavān apāṁ patiḥ

roṣaṁ samutthaṁ śamayan svayā dhiyā

vyavocad aṅgopaśamaṁ gatā vayam

SYNONYMS

saḥ—Varuṇa; evam—thus; utsikta—puffed up; madena—with vanity; vidviṣā—by the enemy; dṛḍham—deeply; pralabdhaḥ—mocked; bhagavān—worshipful; apām—of the waters; patiḥ—the lord; roṣam—anger; samuttham—sprung up; śamayan—controlling; svayā dhiyā—by his reason; vyavocat—he replied; aṅga—O dear one; upaśamam—desisting from warfare; gatāḥ—gone; vayam—we.

TRANSLATION

Thus mocked by an enemy whose vanity knew no bounds, the worshipful lord of the waters waxed angry, but by dint of his reason he managed to curb the anger that had sprung up in him, and he replied: O dear one, we have now desisted from warfare, having grown too old for combat.

PURPORT

As we see, warmongering materialists always create fighting without reason.

TEXT 30

paśyāmi nānyaṁ puruṣāt purātanād

yaḥ saṁyuge tvāṁ raṇa-mārga-kovidam

ārādhayiṣyaty asurarṣabhehi taṁ

manasvino yaṁ gṛṇate bhavādṛśāḥ

SYNONYMS

paśyāmi—I see; na—not; anyam—other; puruṣāt—than the person; purātanāt—most ancient; yaḥ—who; saṁyuge—in battle; tvām—to you; raṇa-mārga—in the tactics of war; kovidam—very much skilled; ārādhayiṣyati—will give satisfaction; asura-ṛṣabha—O chief of the asuras; ihi—approach; tam—Him; manasvinaḥ—heroes; yam—whom; gṛṇate—praise; bhavādṛśāḥ—like you.

TRANSLATION

You are so skilled in war that I do not see anyone else but the most ancient person, Lord Viṣṇu, who can give satisfaction in battle to you. Therefore, O chief of the asuras, approach Him, whom even heroes like you mention with praise.

PURPORT

Aggressive materialistic warriors are actually punished by the Supreme Lord for their policy of unnecessarily disturbing world peace. Therefore Varuṇa advised Hiraṇyākṣa that the right course to satisfy his fighting spirit would be to seek to fight with Viṣṇu.

TEXT 31

taṁ vīram ārād abhipadya vismayaḥ

śayiṣyase vīra-śaye śvabhir vṛtaḥ

yas tvad-vidhānām asatāṁ praśāntaye

rūpāṇi dhatte sad-anugrahecchayā

SYNONYMS

tam—Him; vīram—the great hero; ārāt—quickly; abhipadya—on reaching; vismayaḥ—rid of pride; śayiṣyase—you will lie down; vīraśaye—on the battlefield; śvabhiḥ—by dogs; vṛtaḥ—surrounded; yaḥ—He who; tvat-vidhānām—like you; asatām—of wicked persons; praśāntaye—for the extermination; rūpāṇi—forms; dhatte—He assumes; sat—to the virtuous; anugraha—to show His grace; icchayā—with a desire.

TRANSLATION

Varuṇa continued: On reaching Him you will be rid of your pride at once and will lie down on the field of battle, surrounded by dogs, for eternal sleep. It is in order to exterminate wicked fellows like you and to show His grace to the virtuous that He assumes His various incarnations like Varāha.

PURPORT

Asuras do not know that their bodies consist of the five elements of material nature and that when they fall they become objects of pastimes for dogs and vultures. Varuṇa advised Hiraṇyākṣa to meet Viṣṇu in His boar incarnation so that his hankering for aggressive war would be satisfied and his powerful body would be vanquished.


_Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled “Victory of Hiraṇyākṣa Over All the Directions of the Universe”_

---

Text copied from: [[https://prabhupadabooks.com/sb/3/17]]

- Previous: [03.16: **The Two Doorkeepers of Vaikuṇṭha, Jaya and Vijaya, Cursed by the Sages**](03.16-t.html)
- Next: [03.18: **The Battle Between Lord Boar and the Demon Hiraṇyākṣa**](03.18-t.html)